Today, on Bold Names, Liz Reid. She
oversees Google Search and is something
of a Google lifer, having been there
more than 20 years. She has seen some of
the biggest moments for this company.
And now she's overseeing one of the
company's biggest transitions ever,
the shift to AI. They're dealing with a
bunch of competitors, especially in
chatbots like OpenAI and Perplexity. He
has to do all of this while continuing
to make money from advertisements, and
throw in our discussion with Liz about
the so-called dead internet theory. And
I would say this is a doozy of a
conversation. Yeah, absolutely. But
before we get into that, I've got to
read just a quick note. Uh News Corp,
the owner of the Wall Street Journal,
has a commercial agreement to supply
content to Google platforms. Now that we
got that out of the way, let's get into
the interview.
Liz, thanks for making the time. You
oversee a product that's used by
billions of users every day, and you are
also involved in this transformation
uh with AI, which I have to think
is challenging,
uh uncertain.
You've been at Google for more than 20
years. You've seen other new
technologies. I'm wondering where this
AI moment ranks in that history. Is it
the biggest shift yet?
Um I do think it's the most profound
shift. Um certainly there've been quite
a number of big ones. I think um the
shift to mobile particularly stands out.
Um but for search, um
like it's an information product, right?
And this is a technology shift that is
fundamentally changing about
information. So it the the technology
shift is sort of most directly connected
to the product itself. Um and I think
one of the things that's really just
exciting about it is
you have a lot of engineers and product
managers that have dreamed for years of
things they wanted to build, right? Why
can't we do this? Why can't we answer
this question? Why um can't we make the
information available to people in every
language? Um and it finally feels like
we have a technology that sort of makes
those things
possible. I'm glad you mentioned
in every language, right? Because sort
of the less known history of today's
large language models,
the initial focus for this kind of AI
was language translation, and then it
turned out it could be used for
chatbots.
For good reasons, Google didn't release
their initial language models. Then in
2022,
we had the the ChatGPT moment, and it
felt like it was kind of a hair on fire
moment for Google internally. A lot has
happened in the interim. Google has
caught up, quote unquote, in a lot of
ways,
but it also feels a little bit like
Google is still catching up. Do you feel
like that's the case?
Um I think I I can't talk to the company
as a whole, but I would say in search um
this is a space where we've been using
AI in search for quite some time. Um you
go back to the time of Transformers, and
we brought in search with BERT. And BERT
being your original one of the
Transformers, right?
>> one of the original trans- transformer
>> into search results before OpenAI was
before ChatGPT was even a thing. Yeah,
initially the technology was such that
things like latency and quality felt
promising, but to the point where we had
them sort of more behind the scenes.
They were in ranking. They were in sort
of small features across.
Um and it's only in the last couple of
years that the the tech has really been
there where you can bring it in a much
more forward way to users. Um I think in
search we have uh to your previous point
about billions of people use this. This
is a product that has um a sense of
trust that people have built over years,
and we really want to maintain that. I
think it's been an evolution in search
over the last several years, but it's
exciting to be able to bring it more
forefront to the user and unlock new
capabilities that way. I think that
OpenAI and these other startups are
painting kind of a vision for the future
where a chat AI is the way people find
information and learn about information.
I have to imagine that you see it
slightly different, and I'm wondering
what you think is Google's edge with its
own platform in this kind of AI future.
Yeah, so I think there's a um a a few
aspects of it. I do think this ability
to have more conversational stateful
interactions will continue in the
future. I think that's very powerful
when you're talking with
>> you define stateful for our non-geek
listeners?
>> Um sure. Uh do we understand what you
just said 3 minutes ago and what you
said yesterday and what you said last
month, right? if you have a human
relationship, you don't feel like every
time you meet someone, you're meeting
someone um for the first time, right? So
that's exciting on on the tech. Um but
on the other hand, I would say the so
some of these will paint this picture
that sort of um
your future information is only just
talk to a model. You're just going to
interact with this AI bot, and that's
all it wants. Um and what we've seen and
what we believe in is there's this great
mix of pulling AI to make that
information easier, to enable these
things, but also people still want to
hear from other people.
Um they're not ready to delegate all
their fashion advice, all of um the
things they would previously go to
influencers or trusted editorial, just
to a model. Um not just based on the
accuracy of the data, but also on sort
of like
what makes us human, that this is
special to hear from somebody that you
connect to, that you relate to, their
unique take on something. Um and so we
think about using AI to sort of enhance
search, to enable you to get the quick
answers, but also to dig deeper um
around the web. And so we think that's
really an important part with search,
that you can continue to actually hear
from other people, to hear from other
sites and publishers you trust, um and
trying to figure out how we best bridge
them together. And right now users can
go on to google.com, and they can see
some of this bridge, if you will. It's
the the AI overview, all right? So it it
gives you kind of a snapshot of
of kind of what you're looking for,
right? I've used it uh many times. It's
uh you you can also go deeper. There's
other links there that you can kind of
go go down the rabbit hole. Uh though at
the beginning there was uh some
some funny uh faux pas, if you will. I
think you get asked about them a lot. I
I know uh I remember this one columnist
over at Wired noting
that uh when they were asking it, the
year kept saying it was 2024.
Uh kind of embarrassing, but also I'm
not quite sure if somebody had just
woken up and they're like, I need to go
to the AI and ask what year it is, that
they wouldn't know what year it is. But
what whatever, it really gets to this
issue of trust.
>> saying about what I do when I wake up in
the morning?
It's, you know, it I guess it gets to
this issue of trust though, right? And
knowing the information is is correct.
Do you think that users are harsher in
judging Google when it does this versus
some of these other startups where they
don't have a personal relationship or
they don't have experience with? Or do
they Are are we making much ado about
nothing here? Do the user actually care?
Um I I think people hold Google to a
high respons- like to a high level of
responsibility, and I think that's a
good thing, right? Like people really
rely on us, and we see sometimes that
people go to chatbots, and they will
come to us to check the answer. Search
is a very broad space, and people's
questions are very broad. And some
things people really really care about
um you know, down to the wire, the exact
data. And other things, people just want
to get um
the gist of something. And sometimes
what's interesting with these um tools
is that people aren't using search or
other tools simply just to get the
answer. Sometimes they're using it to
help them brainstorm, to to help them
get started, right? And so if your goal
is to get started, not to finish,
even if you can't help them all the way,
it's better to help them get started and
then allow them to figure out where to
double-check and to figure out where to
go deeper um than it is to be like,
"Sorry, I'm not 100% sure, so go away
and and, you know, try something else,
right?" Um and so we have to think about
that balance constantly. So search is a
a big revenue generator for you, but you
are changing the nature of search with
these AI overviews. I mean,
in my own experience, they have been
getting more accurate. They are
extremely convenient. A lot of times
when I use them, I don't have to click
through on subsequent links unless I
feel the need to fact-check what the
overview is telling me. The data
suggests that millions of other people
are engaging in the same behavior. So
they're not going to the, right, the
canonical 10 blue links. They're not
clicking through.
How is this changing behavior from
people searching the internet through
Google
to demanding answers affecting your
revenue?
So um actually the revenue with AI
overviews has been relatively stable
um accordingly. And and the way to think
about that is um some queries may get
less clicks on ads, but also um it grows
overall queries. So people do more
searches, right? And so those two things
end up balancing out. Part of the thing
to think about is like, what are the
ads? Okay? So if the ads are for shoes,
um you might get an answer in AI
overviews, but you still you still have
to buy the shoes, right? Like it
none of the AI ones substitute the need
for the actual pair of shoes. So you're
still likely to click through, even if
you're doing research initially, and and
then you click through. So sorry, can
you walk me through exactly how you said
some queries you're getting fewer
clicks. So if I'm just like,
you know, what is the relationship
between these two celebrities? Uh you
know, like is one the child of another?
I'm looking up nepo babies or something,
you know, one of my hobbies. It that's
not going to get a click-through, but it
doesn't
>> night with memes. No, it's Friday night
with memes. It's that or World War I
naval history, okay, Tim?
>> So what one thing I would say is um uh
most queries don't have any ads at all.
Yeah. Right? Okay, so your celebrity
example probably didn't show any ads in
the first place, okay? Probably didn't
show any ads after, right? Um and so
that query is sort of unaffected by ads,
okay? Um a lot of ads show on more
commercial um queries, and they show for
ones where you have often interest in a
commercial service, okay? And so in that
case the AI overview is more likely to
be helping give you context um and then
you may continue on with an ad
accordingly. Um the AI overviews um uh
we show ads both above and below AI
overviews. So sometimes the AI overview
shows up above the ads which will that's
more likely to affect the ad
click-through. Sometimes the ads show
above, but overall one of the things
that's um
sort of counterintuitive to many people
is that the number of searches they will
issue is actually not fixed.
Okay, it's not every question that you
think of you bother to ask. You get a
question in your in in your head and you
sort of do this um
very split-second calculation which is
like is it worth me picking up my phone?
Okay, um and so many things you just
don't bother to pick up the phone at all
for. Um but if you lower the the barrier
for getting that information, if you
believe that you can get the answer
quickly, if you believe you can uh get
it reliably easily, then you'll ask more
questions, okay? Um you think about like
a very easy example of this is with
lens, okay? If you previously saw a
great handbag
>> or a beautiful flower on the side of the
road and you had to think about
describing that with text. No way were
you going to figure out how to do that
unless you were extremely motivated. So
you just let it go, right? Okay. But
then you have Google Lens and you ask
the question you get an answer and so
you start asking more questions, okay?
Um we saw this with AI overviews as
well, okay? That ease of being able to
ask a question, that ability to ask a
question where maybe the information
wasn't on any single web page but it was
across multiple web pages. That lowered
the bar for people. And so people
started doing more searches. And so the
increase in searches um sort of
compensates for the impact on on ads
clicks such that we end up roughly at
the same point. Mhm. And ad revenue's
actually been up.
Uh you're you're painting a very rosy
picture here that things are well. Uh
I I mean
that's your job, but on the flip side of
that
I think this it can be confusing out
there in the marketplace because uh part
of the success of Google uh Google
Search is that it's seen as this very
big player. Uh some would say a
monopoly. In fact a federal judge um has
ruled that way. And this judge found
that there were basically two areas
where Google uh was basically engaging
in antitrust
>> That suit involves its core business,
online searches.
>> Google currently controls roughly 90% of
the world's internet searches.
>> And and getting into the the remedies
part of that case in some ways the it's
seen as Google being given a reprieve in
part because
this federal judge, and I want to quote
from it, he's looking at the the case uh
for search for Google and he said quote
the emergence of generative AI changed
the course of the case. And in fact one
of your partners at EQ at Apple,
uh he had some testimony that kind of
contributed to that decision. This idea
that Google's place in the world with
search was slipping because of the the
threat of AI. And so Yeah, based on data
from searches within Safari, I believe.
Yeah, right. So
>> Those searches were going down. Right,
so how you know, what what's what are
the stakes? Are the stakes as high as
the judge be making it that that
Google's at this kind of precipice of
potential failure or is search having a
bright future?
Um so I I think there is more
competition than ever before
um for sure. And also I think search has
a very bright future. I think this is
really an expansionary moment where the
number of people who will ask questions,
the amount of questions that people will
ask overall everywhere is growing
tremendously. And so both Google can
grow very successfully and other people
can grow successfully. It's not sort of
this um one or the other zero-sum game
in the same way because people sort of
assume these things are are zero-sum.
But actually because making these things
easier causes people to ask more
questions, to bring more of their needs,
to get more help, to take that project
that felt a little overwhelming and
they're like, "Ah, I'm never going to
get to that. I don't have enough time."
And suddenly feel like they can embark
on it, right? Um then the whole space
grows and lots of people can grow at the
same time. It's interesting. I hear what
you're saying about the idea of growing
the pie that that everybody's looking
for information. I I think when I look
at some of your rivals
you know, they're not they want to grow
the pie, but they want to eat all the
pie.
They
you know, their idea some of these ideas
it's like you have your personal
assistant who's just going to be you're
going to be asking questions and feeding
and that's going to be the ecosystem you
live in. And that's like a different
vision of the world than we have
currently. And and I just wonder if in
some ways Google faces the innovator's
dilemma, right? You've got a foot in in
the old search business, evolving it,
but also getting into the chat kind of
mentality of how you interact with
information. When you kind of look over
the history of industries that have
dealt with really disruptive change,
sometimes when they deal with the kind
of the straddling or the hybrid approach
they get left behind, right? Uh we can
go through a whole list of them.
I wonder if that is the moment you're in
or do you see it differently?
Well, I think there's a a couple of
things I would say. Um one, Google
Search has handled many transitions.
People ask similar questions when the
time came time of mobile came, right?
Like, "Oh, will you actually be able to
have an ads product in the mobile space?
The phone is so small. You're such a
desktop product. Are you going to be
able to transition?" Um and it actually
proved very healthy for us, right? Um I
think in general um
things for which the tech changes play
very well to Google strength, okay? Um I
also think Google has sort of multiple
things in the space, right? We have both
the evolution of search um and we have
Gemini which is sort of more of a a chat
app from its origin across. Like that's
a different version of straddling is is
to ensure that you both evolve your
mainstay and you disrupt yourself from
within um
and use that together to to tackle the
new challenges ahead. There have been
multiple reports that since Google
launched AI overviews
click-throughs have fallen. Now, you
talked earlier about your aggregate
data.
You you aren't seeing this phenomenon as
far as I understand it. But you know,
I've talked to individual publishers who
said that you know, with the last um
algorithm update, you know, they saw
traffic drop 45%.
Are we conflating two things here
because Google does regularly update the
search rankings and and the sort of
underlying algorithm that determines
where publishers are going to be and how
much traffic they're going to get?
Or is it that while you're seeing
uh overall click-through rates in
aggregate for Google stay the same, for
individual publishers it's spiky and and
there are winners and there are losers
in the AI overview era?
So I would say a couple of things. Um
One of the things that's always true
about Google Search is that you make
changes and and there are winners and
losers, right? Like that's that's a
true on any ranking update. That doesn't
in any way discount what it means for
those individual publishers that are
that are losers, right? Um but the other
thing that's going on is there's a
behavioral shift that is happening in
conjunction with the move to AI. Um and
that is a shift of who people are going
to for a set of questions, okay? Um and
they are going um to short-form video.
They are going to forums. They are going
to user-generated content a lot more
than traditional sites. Um this is
particularly true with younger users,
okay? They're going to podcasts, right?
Rather than
>> I bold names where you get your ideas.
>> So so people people have searched on
this and this is particularly with with
youth. They they show this even more,
okay? Um and they do that
um at some level for news, but often for
things that um the world doesn't
necessarily think of as hard news, but
but publishers are used to thinking
about, right? Um where are you getting
your lifestyle advice? Where are you
getting your cooking? Are you getting
your cooking recipes from the newspaper?
Are you getting your cooking recipes
from YouTube, right? Um and so there's
all these underlying dynamics as well
and we are seeing a shift that is people
going to more of these um forums,
user-generated content, short-form
video, audio, um podcasts. And that is
that is coming at the expense of some
other um more long-form traditional web.
And so that's often times what people
are seeing. You can say it in aggregate
an individual publisher could be
affected by any number of different um
factors going on. Maybe there was a
different publisher that was higher
ranking. Maybe users changed. But we do
have to respond to
who users want to hear from, right? Like
we are in the business of both giving
them high-quality information, but but
information that they seek out. And so
we have over time adjusted our ranking
to surface more of this content um in
response to what we've heard from users.
So to be clear, there's a push and
there's a pull. So the pull is users
want more of this kind of content,
short-form video. Let's use that as a
shorthand for all the different types of
media that you just named.
But there's also a push. You're changing
your algorithm because you see the trend
going there? You see you see it from
users, right? Like we do um we do
everything from user research to we run
an experiment. And so you take feedback
from what you hear from research about
what users want. You then test it out
and then you see how users actually act
um and then based on how users act the
system then starts to learn and adjust
as well. You know what? I think one of
the biggest fears among publishers and
these independent creators out there is
that they aren't going to survive this
kind of coming change, right? And then I
guess one what happens? What what
happens? Who's fueling those AI
overviews at that point?
Do you guys talk about that inside of
Google? Are you are you what's the kind
of conversation about the future of
where information will come from if some
of these established pillars go away.
So I think um from the search side, like
we really care about the health of the
web more than anybody else, right? Like
it is essential um not simply for AI
overviews, but but for the product. So
what we spend a lot of time thinking
about is um how do we surface them
effectively in this world of AI? Um how
can you continue to innovate and
understand what it is? Um we've started
doing more with inline links, okay? That
allows you to say according to so-and-so
with a big link for the so whoever the
so-and-so is, right? You could say
according to bold names, okay? Here's
what they have to say and then and then
click throughout, right? Um building
both the the brand as well as as the the
click-through.
The bolder the better in my opinion. The
bold Yeah, we'll we'll make sure we put
bold names in in in big bold uh font as
well, of course. So continuing to think
about questions like that. Um are there
ways that we can um surface videos in
new ways within some of these
experiences if people are interested in
videos across? Another thing we've been
doing recently um is working on more
personal features. So we did something
with top stories, we did something with
Discover allowing you to say these are
the sources you most trust, okay? So if
you have a subscription to somebody,
okay? Can you get their um
articles at the top of your top stories
by selecting that? If you have
particular people you love to follow so
that we can strengthen the connection um
between um sites and creators and the
audiences they like um and really make
it easier for them to access that
content. Are you familiar with dead
internet theory?
I have not heard that specific phrase
before, although I feel like I've heard
a lot of phrases, so but go ahead. So
dead internet theory is that most of
what's on the internet is already AI
generated cuz that's what people will
click on and that's what will rank and
no one can really distinguish AI
generated content from
human generated content.
I guess outside of video, but even there
you know, I don't personally believe
this is where we are now.
It does feel like it is a warning about
where we could go though and I wonder if
you are at all concerned that the web,
the health of the web, the web could
remain healthy and that people will
still search, but it could be unwell in
the sense that more and more of it is
essentially
AIs training on themselves and that the
content you're directing people to
because of the
uh erosion of other parts of this
ecosystem that you've created that
people depend on. Are you concerned
about that at all?
So I think there's um a couple of
things. I think it's very important that
we continue to surface high-quality
content, okay? Um the the web is
extremely big. You're right that AI
generated makes it even bigger. And so
we've worked um for years on this
question about how do you get rid of
spam?
Okay, now AI generated content doesn't
necessarily equal spam, but oftentimes
when people are referring to it, they're
referring to the spam version of it,
right? Or
phrase AI slop, right? This content that
feels extremely low value across, okay?
Um and we really want to make an effort
that that doesn't surface. Now, you can
have um
a a beautiful AI generated with an
artist image, okay? In response to home
decor inspiration ideas, which I
wouldn't consider AI slop, I would
consider it just, you know, a tool like
Photoshop to go create it. That may
still be great to surface it, right? So
somebody created it. Um but what we see
is people want um content from that
human perspective. Um they want that um
that sense of like what's the unique
thing you bring to it, okay? Um and
actually what we see on what people
click on on AI overviews is content that
is richer and deeper, okay? That surface
level AI generated content, people don't
want that because if they click on that,
they don't actually learn that much more
than they previously got. They don't uh
trust the result anymore across. Um but
so what we see with AI overviews um is
that we sort of surface these sites and
get fewer what we call bounce clicks,
okay? A bounce click is like you click
on your site, I didn't want that and you
go back, right? Okay. Um and so AI
overviews give some content and then we
get to surface sort of um deeper, richer
content and and we'll look to continue
to do that over time so that we really
do get that creator content and not the
AI generated. Now, it is hard work, but
we spend a lot of time and we have a lot
of expertise built on this such that
we've been able to keep the spam rate of
what actually shows up um down and as
well as we've sort of expanded beyond
this concept of spam to sort of low
value content, right? This content that
doesn't add very much, kind of tells you
what everybody else knows, it doesn't
bring it. Um and tried to upweight more
and more um content specifically from
someone who really went in and brought
their perspective or brought their
expertise, put real time and craft into
the work. So wait, I have to follow up
and show my age here
uh cuz I think one of my first blogs was
on Blogger.
Are you telling me
that we live in an age when
content creators can be creating deeper,
longer, better researched, more
personalized content
and that that is what people want? I
mean, I guess you've also said what they
really want is video. Are you saying
that we live in a golden age of um
extended YouTube essays essentially?
Um so I think depending on the topic,
deep may mean different things, okay? Uh
we do live in an era of 4-hour podcasts,
which was not true um uh
you know, 5 10 years ago in the same
way. So in some sense like people are
willing to engage in that. They're not
necessarily willing to engage in every
topic they have, right? They may have
one question in which you've got, you
know, 3 minutes, right? And what's
interesting about AI is that it becomes
easier to match people. So if if I go
really back in time, the web felt like
it was kind of all this leaf content
when it first started, right? This was
the world of like Geocities and other
people would create these things and
you'd find this community and feel
connected, okay? And then the web got
really big and you would use um
pretty vanilla keywords to go look
things up, okay? And because you've got
vanilla ones, you would just look for
like
the recipe or the topic and you'd get
the sites that were sort of most um
popular overall, right? Like you get in
the equivalent of the most popular
brands in shopping, okay? But if you now
can say instead of like I want a dress
for the wedding, I want a dress for the
wedding that is made by a merchant with
the following values and is also red and
is short in the front, okay? Now you can
express that, okay? That allows us to
find that niche merchant in a way that
would not have been possible with AI.
And so what what AI unlocks is that
ability for you to express what you
really care about and what you really
care about is probably different than
what Tim cares about for the same topic.
You'd be surprised.
>> okay? I'll be surprised, okay? You two
are identical people of the same, okay?
What I care about, okay? Chr- Chris's
Chris's selection of shoes is probably
not my selection of shoes, okay? And now
we can express that in in richer
language and find that richer merchant.
But that's also true for that richer
creator or influencer. But the fact that
that human diversity is very broad means
that if people can actually express what
they want, we can actually connect
people in a new way. You know, you
you've said that the
Google, the future of it
is taking the legwork out of searching.
Um
and I wonder what happens to these
skills though of learning and inquiring
knowledge that we've kind of built up
using search in the past. Now AI is
going to help it find information
faster, right? Or differently.
Yeah, um so it's definitely a question I
think about a bunch. I think some
version of your question could be asked
about the internet instead of books,
right? Like, oh my gosh, it's the
internet, you could just type this in.
This means you don't know how to use the
card catalog, it doesn't mean you read
like you can't read a book, you're just
going to read a quick webpage instead of
going through, you know, the book and
sourcing it. Um you could say the same
about um
sort of this general question about
like, oh well, instead of going to one
webpage, now I'm going to get the
summary and then I'm going to dig in
deeper. Okay, well, what happens? Do you
stop at the question or do you learn
more? Do you dig in deeper across? Um
and so I think if we do it right,
there's the things that you never wanted
to spend time learning about
and those things you don't practice the
skills on. But the things that that give
you joy and passion and you do want to
learn more about, um it now feels more
tractable. One, because you don't have
to spend the time on the other stuff,
but two, because it's not as daunting. I
have um
a child with special needs and I try and
figure out, okay, what can I learn more
about how to help her? How do I coach
her? How do I get support and services?
Um at the end of the day, I got three
kids and a job that keeps me somewhat
busy and I can be kind of tired at the
end of the day, but if it feels like um
I can get started and I can get help, um
it's like having somebody help you learn
something. Um it doesn't replace the
need to learn, um but it's kind of nice
to have a tutor to help you on tough
topics.
Well, Liz Reid, thank you so much for
giving us some time today. This was a
wonderful conversation.
Thank you. Appreciate you having me.
[Music]